a hundred years ago this month a 36 year
old Albert Einstein stood up in front of
the Prussian Academy of Sciences in
Berlin to present a radical new theory
of space time and gravity the general
theory of relativity general relativity
is unquestionably Einsteins masterpiece
a theory which reveals the workings of
the universe at the grandest scales
capturing in one beautiful line of
algebra everything from why apples fall
from trees to the beginning of time and
space 1915 must have been an exciting
year to be a physicist to new ideas were
turning the subject on its head
one was Einstein's theory of relativity
the other was arguably even more
revolutionary quantum mechanics a
mind-melting least range yet stunningly
successful new way of understanding the
micro world the world of atoms and
particles over the last century these
two ideas have utterly transformed our
understanding of the universe it's
thanks to relativity in quantum
mechanics that we've learned what the
universe is made from how it began and
how it continues to evolve a hundred
years on we now find ourselves at
another turning point in physics but
what's at stake now is rather different
the next few years may tell us whether
we'll be able to continue to increase
our understanding of nature or whether
maybe for the first time in the history
of science we could be facing questions
that we cannot answer not because we
don't have the brains or technology
because the laws of physics themselves
forbid it this is the essential problem
the universe is far far too interesting
relativity and quantum mechanics appear
to suggest that the universe should be a
boring place it should be dark lethal
and lifeless but when we look around us
we see we live in a universe full of
interesting stuff full of stars planets
trees squirrels the question is
ultimately why does all this interesting
stuff exist why is there something
rather than nothing
this contrary
is the most pressing problem in
fundamental physics and in the next few
years we may find out whether we'll ever
be able to solve it at the heart of this
problem are two numbers two extremely
dangerous numbers these are properties
of the universe that we can measure and
they're extremely dangerous because if
they were different even by a tiny bit
then the universe as we know it would
not exist the first of these numbers is
associated with the discovery that was
made a few kilometers from this Hall at
CERN home of ICH Machine the largest
scientific device ever built by the
human race the Large Hadron Collider the
LHC whizzes subatomic particles around a
27 kilometer ring getting them closer
and closer to the speed of light before
smashing them into each other inside
gigantic particle detectors on the 4th
of July 2012 physicists at CERN
announced to the world that they'd
spotted a new fundamental particle being
created at the violent collisions at the
LHC the Higgs boson now if you follow
the news at the time you'll have seen a
lot of physicists getting very excited
indeed and you'd be forgiven for
thinking we get that way every time we
discover a new particle well that is
kind of true but the Higgs boson is
particularly special we all got so
excited because finding the Higgs proves
the existence of a cosmic energy field
now you may have trouble imagining an
energy field but we've all experienced
one if you've ever held a magnet close
to a piece of metal and felt a force
pulling across that gap then you felt
the effect of a field and the Higgs
field is a little bit like a magnetic
field except it has a constant value
everywhere it's all around us right now
we can't see it or touch it but if it
wasn't there we would not exist the
Higgs field gives mass to the
fundamental particles that were made
from if it wasn't there those particles
would have no mass and no atoms could
form and there would be no us but there
is something deeply mysterious about the
Higgs field relativity and quantum
mechanics tell us that it has two
natural settings a bit like a light
switch it should either be off so that
it has a zero value everywhere in space
or it should be on so that it has an
absolutely enormous value in both of
these scenarios atoms could not exist
and there
for all the other interesting stuff that
we see around us in the universe would
not exist in reality the Higgs field is
just slightly on not zero but ten
thousand trillion times weaker than it's
fully on value a bit like a light switch
that's begat stuck just before the off
position and this value is crucial if it
were a tiny bit different then there
would be no physical structure in the
universe so this is the first of our
dangerous numbers the strength of the
Higgs field theorists have spent decades
trying to understand why it has this
very peculiar number and they've come up
with a number of possible explanations
they have sexy sounding names like
supersymmetry or large extra dimensions
I'm not going to go into the details of
these ideas right now but the key point
is this if any of them explain this
weirdly fine-tuned value of the Higgs
field then we should see new particles
being created at the LHC along with the
Higgs boson so far though we've not seen
any sign of them but there's actually an
even worse example of this kind of
fine-tuning of a dangerous number and
this time it comes from the other end of
the scale from studying the universe at
vast distances one of the most important
consequences of Einstein's general
theory of relativity was the discovery
that the universe began as a rapid
expansion of space and time 13.8 billion
years ago the Big Bang now according to
early versions of The Big Bang Theory
the universe has been expanding ever
since with gravity gradually putting the
brakes on that expansion but in 1998
astronomers made the stunning discovery
that the expansion of the universe is
actually speeding up the universe are
getting bigger and bigger faster and
faster driven by a mysterious repulsive
force called dark energy now whenever
you hear the word dark in physics you
should get very suspicious because it
probably means we don't know what we're
talking about we don't know what dark
energy is but the best idea is that it's
the energy of empty space itself the
energy of the vacuum now if you use good
old quantum mechanics to work out how
strong dark energy should be you get an
absolutely astonishing result you find
that dark energy
should be 10 to the power of a hundred
and twenty times stronger than the value
we observe from astronomy that's one
with a hundred and twenty zeros after it
this is a number so mind bogglingly huge
that it's impossible to get your head
around we often use the word
astronomical when we're talking about
big numbers well even that won't do here
this number is bigger than any number in
astronomy it's a thousand trillion
trillion trillion times bigger than the
number of atoms in the entire universe
so that's a pretty bad prediction in
fact it's been called the worst
prediction in physics and this is more
than just a theoretical curiosity if
dark energy were anywhere near this
strong then the universe would have been
torn apart stars and galaxies could not
form and we would not be here so this is
the second of those dangerous numbers
the strength of dark energy and
explaining it requires an even more
fantastic level of fine-tuning than we
saw for the Higgs field but unlike the
Higgs field this number has no known
explanation the hope was that a complete
combination of Einstein's general theory
of relativity which is the theory of the
universe at grand scales with quantum
mechanics the theory of the universe at
the small scales might provide a
solution
Einstein himself spent most of his later
years on a futile search for a unified
theory of physics and physicists have
kept at it ever since one of the most
promising candidates for a unified
theory is string theory the essential
idea is if you could zoom in on the
fundamental particles that make up our
world you'd see actually that they're
not particles at all but tiny vibrating
strings of energy with each frequency of
vibration corresponding to a different
particle a bit like musical notes on a
guitar string so it's a rather elegant
almost poetic way of looking at the
world but it has one catastrophic
problem it turns out the string theory
isn't one theory at all but a whole
collection of theories it's been
estimated in fact there are 10 to the
500 different versions of string theory
each one would describe a different
universe with different laws of physics
now critics say this makes string theory
unscientific you can't disprove the
theory
but others actually turn this on its
head and said well maybe this apparent
failure is string Theory's greatest
triumph what if all of these 10 to the
500 different possible universes
actually exist out there somewhere in
some grand multiverse suddenly we can
understand the weirdly fine-tuned values
of these two dangerous numbers in most
of the multiverse dark energy is so
strong that the universe gets torn apart
or the Higgs field is so weak that no
atoms can form we live in one of the
places in the multiverse where the two
numbers are just right we live in a
Goldilocks universe now this idea is
extremely controversial and it's easy to
see why if we follow this line of
thinking then we will never be able to
answer the question why is there
something rather than nothing in most of
the multiverse there is nothing and we
live in one of the few places where the
laws of physics allow there to be
something even worse
we can't test the idea of the multiverse
we can't access these other universes so
there's no way of knowing whether
they're there or not so we're in an
extremely frustrating position that
doesn't mean the multiverse doesn't
exist there are other planets other
stars are the galaxies so why not other
universes the problem is is unlikely
we'll ever know for sure now the idea of
the multiverse has been around for a
while but in the last few years we've
started to get the first solid hints
that this line of reasoning may get
borne out despite high hopes for the
first run of the LHC what we were
looking for there we were looking for
new theories of physics supersymmetry or
large extra dimensions that could
explain this weirdly fine-tuned value of
the Higgs field but despite high hopes
the LHC revealed a Barren subatomic
wilderness populated only by a lonely
Higgs boson my experiment published
paper after paper where we glumly had to
conclude that we saw no signs of new
physics the stakes now could not be
higher this summer the LHC began its
second phase of operation with an energy
almost double what we achieved in the
first run
what particle physicists are all
desperately hoping for are signs of new
particle
micro black holes or maybe something
totally unexpected emerging from the
violent collisions at the Large Hadron
Collider if so then we can continue this
long journey that began a hundred years
ago with Albert Einstein towards an ever
deeper understanding of the laws of
nature but if in two or three years time
when the LHC switches off again for a
second long shutdown we found nothing
but the Higgs boson then we may be
entering a new era in physics an era
where there are weird features of the
universe that we cannot explain an era
where we have hints that we live in a
multiverse that lies frustratingly
forever beyond our reach an era where we
will never be able to answer the
question why is there something rather
than nothing thank you
Herry even if you just said the science
may not have some answers I would like
to ask you a couple of questions and the
first is because something like the LHC
is a generational project I just
mentioned the introducing you that we
live in our short-term kind of world how
do you think so long-term projecting
yourself out a generation when building
something like this yeah I mean I was
very lucky that I joined the experiment
I work on at the LHC in 2008 just as we
were switching on and there people in my
research group had been working on it
for three decades their entire careers
on one machine so I think the first
combinate conversations about the LHC
were in 1976 and you kind of start
planning machine without the technology
that you know you're going to need to be
able to build it so the computing power
did not exist in the early 90s when
design work began in earnest one of the
big detectors which record these
collisions they didn't think there was
technology that could withstand the
radiation that would be created the LHC
so there was basically a lump of lead in
the middle of this object with some
detectors around the outside but
subsequently we have developed
technology so you have to rely on
people's ingenuity that they will solve
the problems but it may be a decade or
more down the line now China just
announced two or three weeks ago that
they intend to build a super collider
twice the size of the LHC yeah I was
wondering how you and your colleagues
are welcomed the news well science is
everything right now
oh yeah are you sure about this it
sounds funny for a particle physicist to
say that but I mean no seriously it is
great news so a building machine like
the LHC requires countries from all over
the world to pull their resources no one
nation can afford to build a machine
this slide well apart from maybe China
because they can mobilize huge amounts
of resources manpower and money to build
machines like this so it's only a good
thing what they're really planning to do
is to build a machine that will study
the Higgs boson in detail and could give
us some clues to whether these new ideas
like supersymmetry are really out there
so it's great news for physics I think
Harry thank you thank you very much